April 20, 2012 

Candidate Standard 5102.4 -2012 

# The Printer Working Group 

Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group. All rights reserved. 

## PWG Raster Format 

## Status : Approved 

Abstract: This specification defines a simple raster format to support printing, scanning, 

and facsimile with out printer -specific driver software on resource -limited clients and 

printers. The format includes support for a set of standard and device color spaces and bit 

depths, and defines PWG Semantic Model elements and IPP attributes that enable a 

client to generate or request a supported raster stream. 

This document is a PWG Candidate Standard . For a definition of a "PWG Candidate 

Standard ", see: ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/ pwg /general/pwg -process30.pdf 

This document is available electronically at: 

ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/ pwg/ candidates/cs -ippraster10 -20120 420 -5102.4 .pdf PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 2 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group. All rights reserved. 

This document may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment 

on, or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, 

published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that 

the above copyright notice, this paragraph and the title of the Document as referenced 

below are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this document itse lf 

may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references 

to the IEEE -ISTO and the Printer Working Group, a program of the IEEE -ISTO. 

Title: PWG Raster Format 

The IEEE -ISTO and the Printer Working Group DISCLAIM ANY AND AL L WARRANTIES, 

WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED INCLUDING (WITHOUT LIMITATION) ANY 

IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 

PURPOSE. 

The Printer Working Group, a program of the IEEE -ISTO, reserves the right to make 

changes to the document without further notice. The document may be updated, replaced 

or made obsolete by other documents at any time. 

The IEEE -ISTO takes no position regard ing the validity or scope of any intellectual 

property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of 

the technology described in this document or the extent to which any license under such 

rights might or might not be ava ilable; neither does it represent that it has made any effo rt 

to identify any such rights. 

The IEEE -ISTO invites any interested party to bring to its attention any copyrights, 

patents, or patent applications, or other proprietary rights which may cover tec hnology that 

may be required to implement the contents of this document. The IEEE -ISTO and its 

programs shall not be responsible for identifying patents for which a license may be 

required by a document and/or IEEE -ISTO Industry Group Standard or for condu cting 

inquiries into the legal validity or scope of those patents that are brought to its attention. 

Inquiries may be submitted to the IEEE -ISTO by e -mail at: ieee -isto@ieee.org. 

The Printer Working Group acknowledges that the IEEE -ISTO (acting itself or t hrough its 

designees) is, and shall at all times, be the sole entity that may authorize the use of 

certification marks, trademarks, or other special designations to indicate c ompliance with 

these materials. 

Use of this document is wholly voluntary. The ex istence of this document does not imply 

that there are no other ways to produce, test, measure, purchase, market, or provide other 

goods and servi ces related to its scope PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 3 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

About the IEEE -ISTO 

The IEEE -ISTO is a not -for -profit corporation offering industry groups an innovative and 

flexible operational forum and support services. The IEEE -ISTO provides a forum not 

only to develop standards, but also to facilitate activities that support the implementation 

and acceptance of standards in the marketplace. The organization is affiliated with the 

IEEE (http://www.ieee.org/ ) and the IEEE Standards Association 

(http://standards.ieee.org/) .

For additional information regarding the IEEE -ISTO and its industry programs visit :

http://www.ieee -isto.org .

About the IEEE -ISTO PWG 

The Printer Working Group (or PWG) is a Program of the IEEE Industry Standards and 

Technology Organization (ISTO) with member organizations including printer 

manufacturers, print server developers, operating system providers, network operating 

systems providers, network connectivity vendors, and print management application 

developers. The group is chartered to make printers and the applications and operating 

systems supporting them work together better. All references to the PWG in this 

document implicitly mean “The Printer Working Group, a Program of the IEEE ISTO.” In 

order to meet this objective, the PWG will document the res ults of their work as open 

standards that define print related protocols, interfaces, procedures and conventions. 

Printer manufacturers and vendors of printer related software will benefit from the 

interoperability provided by voluntary conformance to thes e standards. 

In general, a PWG standard is a specification that is stable, well understood, and is 

technically competent, has multiple, independent and interoperable implementations with 

substantial operational experience, and enj oys significant public sup port. 

For additional information regarding the Printer Working Group visit: 

http://www.pwg.org 

Contact information: 

The Printer Working Group 

c/o The IEEE Industry Standards and Technology Organization 

445 Hoes Lane 

Piscataway, NJ 08854 

USA PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 4 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

About the Internet Printing Protocol Work Group 

The Internet Printing Protocol ( IPP ) working gro up has developed a modern, full -featured 

network printing protocol , which is now the industry standard. IPP allows a print client to 

query a printer for its supported cap abilities, features, and parameters to allow the 

selection of an appropriate printer for each print job. IPP also provides job information 

prior to, during, and at the end of job processing. 

For additional information regarding IPP visit: 

http://www.pwg.or g/ ipp /

Implementers of this specification are encouraged to join the IPP mailing list in order to 

participate in any di scussions of the specification. Suggested additions, changes, or 

clarification to this specification, should be sent to the IPP m ailing list for consideration. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 5 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

## Table of Contents 

1. Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 7

2. Terminology ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 8

2.1 Conformance Terminology ................................ ................................ ........................ 8

2.2 Other Terminology ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 8

2.3 Representation of Octets in Examples ................................ ................................ ...... 8

3. Requirements ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 9

3.1 Rationale for the PWG Raster Format ................................ ................................ ....... 9

3.2 Use Cases ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 10 

3.2.1 Mobile Printing to Low Cost InkJet ................................ ................................ .... 10 

3.2.2 Desktop Printing to Low Cost Workgroup Printer ................................ .............. 10 

3.2.3 Printing Envelopes and Content in a Single Document ................................ .... 10 

3.2.4 Printing Using Legacy Interfaces ................................ ................................ ...... 10 

3.3 Out of Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 11 

3.4 Design Requirements ................................ ................................ .............................. 11 

4. PWG Raster Format ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 12 

4.1 File Organization ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 12 

4.2 Synchronization Word ................................ ................................ .............................. 12 

4.3 Page Header ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 13 

4.3.1 Data Types ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 15 

4.3.2 Bitmap Fields ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 19 

4.3.3 Page Processing Fields ................................ ................................ .................... 21 

4.4 Page Bitmap ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 23 

4.4.1 Sample Gray Bitmap ................................ ................................ ......................... 24 

4.4.2 Sample sRGB Bitmap ................................ ................................ ....................... 25 

4.4.3 Sample DeviceCMYK Bitmap ................................ ................................ ........... 26 

5. Semantic Model Elements ................................ ................................ ............................. 27 

5.1 New <service>ServiceDescription Elements ................................ ........................... 27 

5.1.1 PwgRasterDocumentSheetBack ................................ ................................ ....... 28 

5.1.2 PwgRasterDocumentResolutionSupported ................................ ....................... 29 

5.1.3 PwgRasterDocumentTypeSupporte d ................................ ................................ 29 

6. Conformance Requirements ................................ ................................ ......................... 31 

6.1 PWG Raster Consumer Requirements ................................ ................................ .... 31 

6.2 PWG Raster Producer Requirements ................................ ................................ ...... 31 

6.3 Generic Printer Conformance Requirements ................................ ........................... 31 

6.4 Generic Client Conformance Requir ements ................................ ............................ 32 

6.5 IPP Printer Conformance Requirements ................................ ................................ . 32 

6.6 IPP Client Conformance Requirements ................................ ................................ ... 33 

7. Internationalization Considerations ................................ ................................ ............... 33 

8. Security Considerations ................................ ................................ ................................ 33 

9. IANA Considerations ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 34 

9.1 MIME Media Type Registration ................................ ................................ ............... 34 

9.2 Attribute Registrations ................................ ................................ ............................. 35 

9.3 Attribute Value Registrations ................................ ................................ ................... 35 

10. IPP Printer Description Attributes ................................ ................................ ................ 37 PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 6 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

10.1 pwg -raster -document -resolution -supported (1setOf res olution) ............................ 37 

10.2 pwg -raster -document -sheet -back (type2 keyword) ................................ ............... 37 

10.3 pwg -raster -document -type -supported (1setOf type2 keyword) ............................. 37 

11. References ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 38 

11.1 Normative References ................................ ................................ ........................... 38 

11.2 Informative References ................................ ................................ .......................... 39 

12. Author's Address ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 40 

## List of Figures 

Figure 1 - PWG Raster File Organization ................................ ................................ .......... 12 

Figure 2 - Samp le Gray Bitmap ................................ ................................ ......................... 24 

Figure 3 - Sample Color Bitmap ................................ ................................ ........................ 25 

Figure 4 - New <service>ServiceDescription Elements ................................ .................... 27 

Figure 5 - PwgRasterDocumentSheetBack and S ides ................................ ...................... 29 

## List of Tables 

Table 1 - PWG Raster Page Header ................................ ................................ ................. 13 

Table 2 - ColorOrderEnum Values ................................ ................................ .................... 15 

Table 3 - ColorSpaceEnum Values ................................ ................................ ................... 15 

Table 4 - EdgeEnum Values ................................ ................................ ............................. 16 

Table 5 - MediaPositionEnum Values ................................ ................................ ............... 16 

Table 6 - OrientationEnum Values ................................ ................................ .................... 17 

Table 7 - PrintQualityEnum Values ................................ ................................ ................... 18 

Table 8 - WhenEnum Values ................................ ................................ ............................ 18 

Table 9 - Transform Values for Backside Images ................................ ............................. 20 

Table 10 - Supported Duplex and Tumble Values ................................ ............................ 21 

Table 11 - New Service Description Elements ................................ ................................ .. 28 

Table 12 - PwgRasterDocumentTypeSupported Keyword Values ................................ .... 30 

Table 13 - IPP Printer Description Attributes ................................ ................................ ..... 37 PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 7 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 1. Intro duction 

Historically, printer manufacturers have used a variety of proprietary or device -specific 

variants of industry standard page description languages (PDLs) to support printing, 

leading to the proliferation of so -called "printer driver" software for e very supported 

operating system and/or platform. 

The objective of the PWG IPP Everywhere project includes the definition of a PWG raster 

format that can be used for printing, facsimile, and scanning from limited resource clients 

and printers. After performing a detailed analysis [ANALYSIS], CUPS Raster was chosen 

because it me ets all of the design requirements and uses the few est resources of the 

raster file formats considered. 

This specification defines a proper subset of CUPS Raster [CUPSRASTER] to serve as 

the PWG Raster format and includes support for a set of standard and device Color 

Spaces and bit depths , defines PWG Semantic Model elements and IPP attributes that 

enable a client to generate or request a supported raster stream for a printer , a nd 

registers a new MIME media type and the corresponding IPP attributes with IANA .PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 8 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 2. Terminology 

## 2.1 Conformance Terminology 

Capitalized terms, such as MUST, MUST NOT, RECOMMENDED, REQUIRED, 

SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, MAY, and OPTIONAL, have special meaning relating to 

conformance as defined in Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels 

[RFC2119]. 

The term CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED is additionally defined for a conformance 

requirement that applies to a particular capability or feature. 

## 2.2 Other Terminology 

Color Component ; an individual element or channel for a Color Space or Pixel, for 

example “Red”, “Green” and “Blue” are Color Components of the “RGB” Color Space. 

Color Order ; the order of Color Components within the Page Bitmap. These Color Orders 

are cal led “Chunked”, “Banded”, and “Planar” in the CUPS Raster Format specification 

[CUPSRASTER]. 

Color Space ; the interpretation of Pixel color in a page bitmap, for example “RGB”, 

“Grayscale”, “CMYK”, and so forth. 

CUPS Raster ; the image file format defined by [CUPSRASTER]. 

PackBits ; a simple run -length encoding algorithm for data compression. Each sequence is 

encoded as a series of repeated or non -repeated Pixels. 

Page Bitmap ; a rectangular grid of Pixels. 

Page Header ; the binary page processing dictionary of Adobe PostScript and raster key 

values for a Page Bitmap. 

Pixel ; a set of Color Components representing a single grid point in a Page Bitmap. 

## 2.3 Representation of Octets in Examples 

Throughout this specification, octets are represented using pairs of hexadecimal digits 

prefixed by the string "0x". Multiple contiguous octets may also be combined into a short 

form similar to that defined in Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF [STD68 ]

with the "0x" prefix replaced by a period ("."), for example 0x12 and 0x34 may be 

combined as 0x12.34. The short form is used to group related octets for clarity. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 9 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 3. Requirements 

## 3.1 Rationale for the PWG Raster Format 

The PWG IPP Everywhere project needs a standard raster format to support printing, 

scanning, and facsimile without printer -specific driver software on resource -limited clients 

and printers. High -level PDLs such as Adobe PostScript [POSTSCRIPT], OpenXPS 

[OPENXPS], and PDF [ISO32000 ] are sufficiently generic to be used for basic printing, 

however they require significant resources in the printer and can be difficult to generate 

and stream from some environments. Existing standard bitmap image formats have 

issues as well: 

• JPEG: Lossy compre ssion, no multi -page support 

• JPEG 2000: Lossy compression, no multi -page support, resource -intensive 

• MNG: Resource -intensive and not widely implemented or supported 

• PDF/is: Lossy compression, can be resource -intensive , not widely implemented 

• PNG: No multi -page support, resource -intensive 

• TIFF: Can be resource -intensive, hard to stream, multiple format variants 

CUPS Raster [CUPSRASTER] is a simple bitmap container to support printing , facsimile, 

and scanning on all types of printers. It provides the followin g features: 

• Support for multiple pages 

• Support for standard color spaces backed by existing ICC color profiles 

• Support for device color spaces backed by printer - or user -supplied ICC color 

profiles 

• Adaptable byte order for encoding and decoding 

• A single, l ossless compression algorithm that is space, memory, and processor 

efficient 

• Per -page processing instructions based on the Adobe PostScript page device 

dictionary 

• An encoding that can be easily stream ed 

CUPS Raster has been used over existing print data tr ansports such as the Internet 

Printing Protocol (IPP) since 1999. CUPS Raster can also be further reduced in size using 

HTTP or IPP compression algorithms such as Compress and Flate when supported by the 

client and printer. 

However, CUPS R aster supports ma ny more Color Spaces, Color Orders, bit depths, and 

byte orders than are needed for a modern printer . Moreover, the Adobe PostScript page 

device dictionary does not map cleanly to IPP or the PWG Semantic Model, leading to 

additional complexities that would make interoperability difficult. 

By defining a proper subset of CUPS Raster, we both enable support for a new class of 

printer without the use of printer - and platform -specific driver software in the c lient and PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 10 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

greatly reduce the number of variables for i nteroperability. And by defining which page 

header fields are mapped to/from PWG Job Ticket elements we also enable a low -cost 

solution for per -page overrides embedded within a document. 

## 3.2 Use Cases 

3.2.1 Mobile Printing to Low Cost InkJet 

Jane has a smart phone with Wi -Fi capability and a built -in camera. She prints photos 

from her phone to a low -cost Wi -Fi inkjet printer. Both the client (phone) and printer ha ve 

limited memory and processor resources . The printer support s basic raster printing on a 

variety of media types and sizes .

During printing, her client software queries the printer for supported media, resolutions, 

and raster modes, produces a printer -ready raster representation of the photo for the 

selected media, and streams it to the p rinter for output. 

3.2.2 Desktop Printing to Low Cost Workgroup Printer 

John has a desktop PC he uses to write whitepapers and other business documents. He 

prints these documents to a low -cost Ethernet workgroup laser printer with three paper 

trays and a duplex ing accessory. The printer has enough memory to hold a partial image 

of one side of a sheet .

During printing, his client software queries the printer for supported media, resolutions, 

raster modes, and duplex support, produces printer -ready raster pages of the documents, 

and streams them to the printer for output. 

3.2.3 Printing Envelopes and Content in a Single Document 

Mary is sending acceptance letters to new students at a college. She prints the letters and 

envelopes using a mail merge program. The printer ha s s tationery and envelopes loaded. 

During printing, her client software embeds per -page overrides for media in order to 

alternate between envelopes and letters. Once completed, she folds and stuffs the 

envelopes with the corresponding letters and mails the m to the new students. 

3.2.4 Printing Using Legacy Interfaces 

Justin has a desktop PC and a low -end InkjJet printer implementing the standard USB 

print class. When he connected the printer to the PC, the operating system automatically 

added a print queue with th e correct driver for the printer. 

Justin prints photos and documents from a variety of applications on his PC . The printing 

software on his PC converts those photos and documents into a raster format with 

embedded page processing instructions to send to th e printer. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 11 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

## 3.3 Out of Scope 

The following items are considered out of scope for this specification: 

1. Definition of a new file format; we want to minimize the proliferation of file formats 

and reuse existing formats whenever possible. 

2. Extensions to the CUPS Rast er format ; we want to minimize the proliferation of 

file formats and reuse the existing CUPS Raster format by defining a simple ,

backwards -compatible subset of the format for basic raster printing, scanning ,

and facsimile .

3. Definition of transport protocols, interfaces, or security extensions to be used with 

the PWG Raster Format. 

4. Definition of legacy interface bindings to be used with the PWG Raster Format. 

## 3.4 Design Requirements 

The PWG Raster Format design requirements are :

1. Since both the client and printer may have limited memory, a raster format for 

printing , scanning, or facsimile must be streamable to minimize buffering. 

2. Because the printer may have limited memory, the client must be able to discover 

the supported raster resolutions and how to pr ovide duplex page images – no 

flip, X flip, Y flip, or rotation by 180 degrees (both X and Y flip) - so that the printer 

does not need to perform expensive transformations of the client -supplied 

images. 

3. Because the client and printer may not have sophistic ated color management 

capabilities, standard color spaces should be used to foster improved color 

fidelity. 

4. Ability to specify per -page processing instructions derived from a subset of the 

PWG Print Job Ticket. 

The PWG Raster Format design recommendations are :

1. Some form of data compression should be used to limit network bandwidth 

usage. Text printing favors lossless compression algorithms to preserve edge 

detail and resource limitations require simpler compression algorithms. 

2. A bi -level imaging mode may be useful when printing text and line art. 

3. The order of multi -octet values should be predefined to limit the complexity of 

implementations .

4. While a printer may have limited space for color tables, it should still be possible 

to support a managed color workfl ow when both the client and printer are 

capable. This generally requires some sort of device color space support. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 12 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 4. PWG Raster Format 

The CUPS Raster specification [CUPSRASTER] defines three format variants for the 

MIME media type “application/vnd.cups -raster” . The following subsections define the 

subset of the CUPS Raster v2 format used for the MIME media type “image/ pwg -raster ”. 

## 4.1 File Organization 

Figure 1 - PWG Raster File Organization shows the general organization of e very PWG 

Raster file . Each file begins with a 32 -bit synchronization word followed by zero or more 

pages. Each page consis ts of a header followed by the bitmap image for the page. The 

bitmap image is compressed using a Pack Bits -like algorithm to reduce file size without 

significant overhead. Integer values larger than 8 -bits are specified in network byte order. 

1-bit bitmap d ata is provided in network bit order. 

## 4.2 Synchronization Word 

The synchronization word is a 32 -bit unsigned integer with the value 0x52.61.53.32 

(“RaS2”). 

Figure 1 - PWG Raster File Organization 

# Synchronization Word 

# Page 1 (Header + Bitmap) 

# Page 2 (Header + Bitmap) 

# ... 

# Page N (Header + Bitmap) PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 13 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

## 4.3 Page Header 

Table 1 - PWG Raster Page Header describes the 1796 -octet page header that appears 

at the beginning of each p age. Most of the fields in the header are derived from the Adobe 

PostScript page device dictionary [POSTSCRIPT]. All reserved fields MUST be 0. 

Table 1 - PWG Raster Page Header 

Bytes Type Name PWG SM Element 

0-63 CString PwgRaster 

64 -127 CString MediaColor MediaCol 

128 -191 CString MediaType MediaCol 

192 -255 CString PrintContent Optimize PrintContentOptimize 

256 -267 Reserved Reserved 

268 -271 WhenEnum CutMedia Finishings 

272 -275 Boolean Duplex Sides 

276 -283 Unsigned Integer x 2 HWResolution PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionSupported 

284 -299 Reserved Reserved 

300 -30 3 Boolean InsertSheet InsertSheet 

304 -307 WhenEnum Jog Finishings 

308 -311 EdgeEnum LeadingEdge FeedDirection 

312 -323 Reserved Reserved 

324 -327 MediaPositionEnum MediaPosition MediaCol 

328 -331 UnsignedInteger MediaWeight Metric MediaCol 

332 -339 Reserved Reserved 

340 -343 UnsignedInteger NumCopies Copies 

344 -347 OrientationEnum Orientation OrientationRequested 

348 -351 Reserved Reserved 

352 -359 UnsignedInteger x 2 PageSize MediaCol 

360 -367 Reserved Reserved 

368 -371 Boolean Tumble Sides 

372 -375 Unsigned Integer Width MediaCol, 

PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionsSupported ,

Resolution 

376 -379 Unsigned Integer Height MediaCol, 

PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionsSupported ,

Resolution 

380 -383 Reserved Reserved 

384 -387 Unsigned Integer BitsPerColor PrintColorMode, 

PwgRasterDocument 

TypesSupported ,

Quality 

388 -391 Unsigned Integer BitsPerPixel PrintColorMode, 

PwgRasterDocument 

TypesSupported ,

Quality 

392 -395 Unsigned Integer BytesPerLine MediaCol, PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 14 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

Bytes Type Name PWG SM Element 

PrintColorMode, 

PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionsSupported, 

PwgRasterDocument 

TypesSupported ,

Quality, Resolution 

396 -399 ColorOrderEnum ColorOrder 

400 -403 ColorSpaceEnum ColorSpace PrintColorMode, 

PwgRasterDocument 

TypesSupported 

404 -419 Reserved Reserved 

420 -423 Unsigned Integer NumColors PrintColorMode, 

PwgRasterDocument 

TypesSupported 

424 -451 Reserved Reserved 

452 -455 UnsignedInteger TotalPageCount Impressions 

456 -459 Integer CrossFeedTransform PwgRasterDocument 

SheetBack , Sides 

460 -463 Integer FeedTransform PwgRasterDocument 

SheetBack , Sides 

464 -467 UnsignedInteger ImageBoxLeft MediaCol, 

PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionsSupported, 

PwgRasterDocument 

SheetBack , Resolution 

468 -471 UnsignedInteger ImageBoxTop MediaCol, 

PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionsSupported, 

PwgRasterDocument 

SheetBack , Resolution 

472 -475 UnsignedInteger ImageBoxRight MediaCol, 

PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionsSupported, 

PwgRasterDocument 

SheetBack , Resolution 

476 -479 UnsignedInteger ImageBoxBottom MediaCol, 

PwgRasterDocument 

ResolutionsSupported, 

PwgRasterDocument 

SheetBack , Resolution 

480 -483 SrgbColor AlternatePrimary 

484 -487 PrintQualityEnum PrintQuality Quality 

488 -507 Reserved Reserved 

508 -511 UnsignedInteger VendorIdentifier 

512 -515 UnsignedInteger VendorLength 

516 -1603 VendorData VendorData 

1604 -1667 Reserved Reserved 

1668 -1731 CString RenderingIntent PrintRenderingIntent 

1732 -1795 CString PageSizeName Media, MediaCol PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 15 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.3.1 Data Types 

The page header utilizes several data types described in the following subsections. 

4.3.1.1 Boolean 

Boolean fields are 32 -bit unsigned (one's complement) integers with a value of 0 (false) or 

1 (true) .

4.3.1.2 CString 

CString fields are 64 -octets in length containing up to 63 US ASCII characters followed by 

an ASCII NUL (0). 

4.3.1.3 ColorOrderEnum 

ColorOrderEnum fields are 32 -bit unsigned (one's complement) integers containing on e of 

the values listed in Table 2.       

> Table 2-ColorOrderEnum Values
> Value Keyword Description
> 0Chunky Chunky pixels, e.g. CMYK CMYK
> CMYK ...

4.3.1.4 ColorSpaceEnum 

ColorSpaceEnum fields are 32 -bit unsigned (one's complement) integers containing one 

of the values listed in Table 3.                                    

> Table 3-ColorSpaceEnum Values
> Value Keyword Description
> 1Rgb Device RGB (red green blue)
> 3Black Device black
> 6Cmyk Device CMYK (cyan magenta
> yellow black)
> 18 Sgray sRGB grayscale
> 19 Srgb sRGB color
> 20 AdobeRgb Adobe RGB color
> 48 Device1 Device color, 1 colorant
> 49 Device2 Device color, 2 colorants
> 50 Device3 Device color, 3 colorants
> 51 Device4 Device color, 4 colorants
> 52 Device5 Device color, 5 colorants
> 53 Device6 Device color, 6 colorants
> 54 Device7 Device color, 7 colorants
> 55 Device8 Device color, 8 colorants
> 56 Device9 Device color, 9 colorants

PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 16 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

Value Keyword Description 

57 Device10 Device color, 10 colorants 

58 Device11 Device color, 11 colorants 

59 Device12 Device color, 12 colorants 

60 Device13 Device color, 13 colorants 

61 Device14 Device color, 14 colorants 

62 Device15 Device color, 15 colorants 

4.3.1.5 EdgeEnum 

EdgeEnum fields are 32 -bit unsigned (one's complement) integers containing one of the 

values listed in Table 4.

Table 4 - EdgeEnum Values 

Value Keyword Description 

0 ShortEdgeFirst The short edge of the media is first. 

1 LongEdgeFirst The long edge of the media is first. 

4.3.1.6 Integer 

Integer fields are 32 -bit signed (two's complement) integers. 

4.3.1.7 MediaPositionEnum 

MediaPositionEnum fields are 32 -bit unsigned (one's complement) integers containing 

one of the values listed in Table 5.

Table 5 - MediaPositionEnum Values 

Value Keyword Description 

0 Auto Default or automatically selected source. 

1 Main The primary or main source. 

2 Alternate The secondary or alternate source. 

3 LargeCapacity The large capacity source. 

4 Manual The manual feed source. 

5 Envelope The envelope feed source. 

6 Disc The CD/DVD/Bluray disc source. 

7 Photo The photo media source. 

8 Hagaki The Hagaki media source. 

9 MainRoll The primary or main roll. 

10 AlternateRoll The secondary or alternate roll. 

11 Top The topmost source. 

12 Middle The middle source. 

13 Bottom The bottommost source. 

14 Side The side source. 

15 Left The leftmost source. 

16 Right The rightmost source. 

17 Center The center source. 

18 Rear The rear source. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 17 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

Value Keyword Description 

19 ByPassTray The by -pass or multi -purpose source. 

20 Tray1 Tray 1. 

21 Tray2 Tray 2. 

22 Tray3 Tray 3. 

23 Tray4 Tray 4. 

24 Tray5 Tray 5. 

25 Tray6 Tray 6. 

26 Tray7 Tray 7. 

27 Tray8 Tray 8. 

28 Tray9 Tray 9. 

29 Tray10 Tray 10. 

30 Tray11 Tray 11. 

31 Tray12 Tray 12. 

32 Tray13 Tray 13. 

33 Tray14 Tray 14. 

34 Tray15 Tray 15. 

35 Tray16 Tray 16. 

36 Tray17 Tray 17. 

37 Tray18 Tray 18. 

38 Tray19 Tray 19. 

39 Tray20 Tray 20. 

40 Roll1 Roll 1. 

41 Roll2 Roll 2. 

42 Roll3 Roll 3. 

43 Roll4 Roll 4. 

44 Roll5 Roll 5. 

45 Roll6 Roll 6. 

46 Roll7 Roll 7. 

47 Roll8 Roll 8. 

48 Roll9 Roll 9. 

49 Roll10 Roll 10. 

4.3.1.8 OrientationEnum 

OrientationEnum fields are 32 -bit integers containing the one of the values listed in Table 

6.

Table 6 - OrientationEnum Values 

Value Keyword Description 

0 Portrait Not rotated 

1 Landscape Rotated 90 degrees 

counter -clockwise 

2 ReversePortrait Rotated 180 degrees 

3 ReverseLandscape Rotated 90 degrees 

clockwise PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 18 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.3.1.9 PrintQualityEnum 

PrintQualityEnum fields are 32 -bit integers containing the one of the values listed in Table 

7.              

> Table 7-PrintQualityEnum Values
> Value Keyword Description
> 0<default value> The default print quality.
> 3Draft Draft/fast print quality.
> 4Normal Normal print quality.
> 5High High/best/photo print quality.

4.3.1.10 Reserved 

Reserved fields are a sequence of octets initialized to the value 0. 

4.3.1.11 SrgbColor 

SrgbColor fields are 32 -bit integers containing a 24 -bit sRGB color value. The upper 8 bits 

are 0, followed by 8 bits of red, 8 bits of green, and 8 bits of blue. 

4.3.1.12 Unsigned Integer 

UnsignedInteger fields are 32 -bit unsigned (one's complement) integers. 

4.3.1.13 Vendo rData 

Vendo rData fields are a sequence of octets containi ng vendor -specific data. 

4.3.1.14 WhenEnum 

WhenEnum fields are 32 -bit unsigned (one's complement) integers containing one of the 

values listed in Table 8.               

> Table 8-WhenEnum Values
> Value Keyword Description
> 0Never Never apply feature.
> 1AfterDocument Apply feature after current document/file.
> 2AfterJob Apply feature after current job.
> 3AfterSet Apply feature after current set/copy.
> 4AfterPage Apply feature after current page.

PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 19 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.3.2 Bitmap Fields 

4.3.2.1 PwgRaster 

The PwgRaster field MUST be initialized to the string "PwgRaster" with NUL -padding as 

required by a CString (section 4.3.1.2 ). 

4.3.2.2 HWResolution 

The HW Resolution field consists of two integers representing the cross -feed and feed 

resolutions of the page bitmap in pixels (dots) per inch and MUST be initialized to one of 

the supported values reported by the " PwgR aster Document Resolution Supported" element 

in the <service>ServiceDescription group .

4.3.2.3 LeadingEdge 

The LeadingEdge field MUST be initialized to 0 if the " Feed Direc tion" value for the given 

media or input tray is ' Shor tEdge First' and 1 if the value is ' Long Edge First' .

4.3.2.4 Width and Height 

The Width and Height fields MUST be initialized to the full width and height of the current 

page in addressable units as defined by the HWResolution field. Thus, each page bitmap 

provides a "full bleed" page image. The choice of values MAY be influenced by the values 

of the "PrintColorMode", "Quality", and "Resolution" elements in the 

<service>DocumentProcessing group. 

4.3.2.5 BitsPerColor, BitsPerPixel, ColorSpace, and NumColors 

The BitsPerColor, BitsPerPixel, ColorSpace, and NumColors fields MUST be initialized to 

values corresponding to a “ Pwg Raster Document TypesS upported” value, as defined in 

Table 12 . The ch oice of values MAY be influenced by the values of the "PrintColorMode", 

"Quality", and "Resolution" elements in the <service>DocumentProcessing group .

4.3.2.6 BytesPerLine 

The BytesPerLine field MUST be initialized to the number of octets for a single 

uncompressed line in the page bitmap, as described by the following formula: 

BytesPerLine = TRUNCATE((BitsPerPixel * Width + 7) / 8) 

4.3.2.7 TotalPageCount 

The TotalPageCount field specifies the number of pages in the entire file or 0 if the total 

number of pages is not known when the file is produced and corresponds to the 

"Impressions" element in the <service>JobDescription group. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 20 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.3.2.8 Cross Feed Transform and Feed Transform 

The Cross FeedTransform and FeedTransform fields specify the orientation of the page 

bitmap in the Cross Feed and Feed directions, respectively. Values of 1 indicate normal 

orientation, typically left -to -right for the Cross Feed and top -to -bottom for the Feed 

directions, while values of -1 indicate reversed orientation, typically right -to -left and 

bottom -to -top respectively. The values are determined using the value of the "Sides" 

element in the <service>DocumentProcessing group and the value of the 

"PwgRasterDocumentSheetBack" element in the <service> ServiceDescription group. 

Table 9 shows the values for backside images; frontside images always use the value 1. 

These fields are used to convey the coordinate system used for the backside image for 

duplex printing or scanning - page bitmaps MUST always be produced using the printer's 

"native" coordinate system to minimize resource requirements on the printer.                                 

> Table 9-Transform Values for Back side Image s
> Sides PwgRasterDocument -
> SheetBack
> CrossFeed -
> Tran sform
> Feed -
> Transform
> OneSided <don't care> 11
> TwoSidedLongEdge Flipped 1-1
> TwoSidedLongEdge ManualTumble 11
> TwoSidedLongEdge Normal 11
> TwoSidedLongEdge Rotated -1-1
> TwoSidedShortEdge Flipped -11
> TwoSidedShortEdge ManualTumble -1-1
> TwoSidedShortEdge Normal 11
> TwoSidedShortEdge Rotated 11

4.3.2.9 ImageBoxLeft, ImageBoxTop, ImageBoxRight, and ImageBoxBottom 

The ImageBoxLeft, ImageBoxTop, ImageBoxRight, and ImageBoxBottom fields specify 

the area, in pixels, that contains non -empty content and corresponds directly to the 

ImageBox element in the PWG Semantic Model. Pixels are measured from the beginning 

of the page bitmap, so the coordinates reflect the orientation specified by the 

XFeedTransform and FeedTransform fields. 

All fields MUST hav e the value 0 if the ImageBox is unknown. 

4.3.2.10 AlternatePrimary 

The AlternatePrimary field specifies the color to use for bi -level or monochrome page 

bitmaps as an sRGB color value. Black (ColorSpace=3) values are mapped proportionally 

from no ink (pixel = 0; typically white) to the specified sRGB color mapped to the 

corresponding device colorants (pixel = 1, 255, or 65535 depending on the BitsPerColor 

value). PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 21 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.3.2.11 VendorIdentifier, VendorLength, and VendorData 

The VendorIdentifier, VendorLength, and VendorData field s allow a vendor to embed 

arbitrary data in a page header. They should be initialized to the value 0 when not used. 

The VendorIdentifier field contains to the USB vendor identification number for the vendor 

providing the data. 

The VendorLength field specif ies the number of octets that are used in the VendorData 

field. 

The VendorData field contains the vendor octets. 

4.3.3 Page Processing Fields 

The page processing fields in a page header allow the Client to supply basic job intent 

information inline with the docu ment data. 

Most features supported by the page processing fields require the printer to do logical 

grouping. For example, when printing duplex pages the printer MUST treat pairs of 

images as the sides of a single media sheet, finishing and output bin value s apply to any 

run of pages with the same page processing field values, and so forth. 

Printers MUST support pages with different page processing field values to support 

common mail merge and automation use cases where a mix of normal pages, letterhead, 

and envelopes may be present in a single file. 

4.3.3.1 CutMedia 

This field indicates whether output should be trimmed (cut) and corresponds to the 'Trim' 

values in the "JobFinishings" element of the <service>JobProcessing group .

4.3.3.2 Duplex and Tumble 

These fields specify the duplex printing mode for the current page. Table 10 lists the 

supported combinations for a given value of the "Sides" element in the 

<service> DocumentProce ssing group .   

> Table 10 -Supported Duplex and Tumble Values

Duplex Tumble Sides 

FALSE (0) FALSE (0) OneSided 

TRUE (1) FALSE (0) TwoSidedLongEdge 

TRUE (1) TRUE (1) TwoSidedShortEdge PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 22 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.3.3.3 InsertSheet 

This field specifies whether to insert a single blank sheet prior to the current page, using 

the media defined by the current page header and corresponds to the Semantic Model 

element of the same name in the <service>DocumentProcessing group .

4.3.3.4 Jog 

This field specifies whether to jog (offs et) pages in the output bin and corresponds to the 

'JogOffset' values in the "JobFinishings" element of the <service>JobProcessing group .

4.3.3.5 MediaColor 

This field specifies the media color name corresponding to the "MediaColor" sub -element 

of the "MediaCol" sub -group of the <service> DocumentProcessing group . When the 

empty string, the default media color is used. 

4.3.3.6 MediaPosition 

This field specifies the media input tray or source corresponding to the "MediaSource" 

element and "MediaSource" sub -element of the "MediaCol" sub -group of the 

<service> DocumentProcessing group . Table 5 provides a list of MediaPosition values with 

their correspondin g "MediaSource" values. When 0, the default media source is used. 

4.3.3.7 MediaType 

This field specifies the media type name corresponding to the "MediaType" element and 

"MediaType" sub -element of the "MediaCol" sub -group of the 

<service> DocumentProcessing group . When the empty string, the default media type is 

used. 

4.3.3.8 MediaWeight Metric 

This field specifies the media weight in grams per square meter and corresponds to the 

"MediaWeight Metric " sub -element of the "MediaCol" sub -group of the 

<service> DocumentProcessing group . When 0, the default media weight is used. 

4.3.3.9 NumCopies 

This field specifies the number of copies of the current page to produce and corresponds 

to the "Copies" element of the <service>DocumentProcessing group . When 0, the default 

number of copies is use d. 

4.3.3.10 Orientation 

This field specifies the orientation of the page and corresponds to the 

"OrientationRequested" element of the <service>DocumentProcessing group .PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 23 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.3.3.11 PageSize and PageSizeName 

The PageSize field specifies the width and length of the current page in points. When the 

width and length are 0 the default media size is used, typically as defined by the Width, 

Height, and HWResolution fields for the page bitmap. The PageSize field corresponds to 

the "MediaSize" sub -group of the "MediaCol" sub -group of the 

<service> DocumentProcessing group .

The PageSizeName field specifies a named size as defined by the PWG Standard for 

Media Standardized Name s [PWG5101.1]. When the empty string, the default media size 

is used. The PageSizeName field corresponds to the "Media" element and 

"MediaSizeName" sub -element of the "MediaCol" sub -group of the 

<service> DocumentProcessing group .

4.3.3.12 PrintContent Optimize 

This field specifies the general document type corresponding to the 

"PrintContentOptimize" element of the <service> Do cumentProcessing group .

4.3.3.13 PrintQuality 

This field specifies the relative print quality for the page and corresponds to the "Quality" 

element of the <service> DocumentProcessing group . Valid values are 0 for the default 

print quality, 3 for draft quality, 4 fo r normal quality, and 5 for high quality. 

4.3.3.14 RenderingIntent 

The RenderingIntent field specifies the colorimetric rendering intent for the page and 

corresponds to the "PrintRenderingIntent" element of the <service> DocumentProcessing 

group . When the empty stri ng, the default rendering intent is used. 

## 4.4 Page Bitmap 

The page bitmap is compressed using a PackBits -like algorithm. Pixel color values are 

packed into an integral number of octets. 8 pixel color values are packed into a single 

octet for compression when B itsPerPixel is 1. 

Each line of raster data begins with a repetition count from 1 to 256 that is encoded using 

a single octet containing "count - 1". 

After the repetition count, whole color values for that line are run -length encoded using a 

PackBits -like run -length encoding algorithm: 1 to 128 repeated colors are encoded using 

an initial octet containing "count - 1" followed by the color value octet (s) while 2 to 128 

non -repeating colors are encoded using an initial octet containing "257 - count" followed 

by the color value octet( s).PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 24 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.4.1 Sample Gray Bitmap 

The 23x8 1 -bit sGray image shown in Figure 2 would be encoded as the following 21 

octets .        

> 0x00 0xFE.8F.78.F7
> 0x00 0xFE.76.77.67
> 0x03 0x 02.77
> 0x00 0x FE.8E.38.E3
> 0x00 0x02.FF
> Figure 2-Sample Gray Bitmap

The unused trailing bits (1 bit in this example) can have any value, and in this example we 

use a value of 1 to improve the compression slightly. 

The first line (0x00) is a sequence of three octets (0xFE.8F.78.F7). 

The second line (0x00) is another sequence of three octets (0xFE.76.77.67). 

The third through sixth lines (0x03) contain a sequence of three repeated octets 

(0x02.77). 

The seventh line (0x00) is a sequence of three octets (0xFE.8E.38.E3). 

The last line (0x00) is a sequence of three repeated octets (0x02.FF). PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 25 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.4.2 Sample sRGB Bitmap 

The 8x8 24 -bit sRGB image shown in Figure 3 would be encoded as the following 87

octets:                  

> 0x 00 0x 00.FF.FF.FF 0x 02.FF.FF.00 0x 03.FF.FF.FF
> 0x 00 0x FE.FF.FF.00.00.00.FF.FF. FF.00 0x 02.FF.FF.FF 0x FF .00.FF.00 .FF.FF.FF
> 0x 00 0x 01.FF.FF.00 0x 02.FF.FF.FF 0x 02.00.FF.00
> 0x 00 0x 02.FF.FF.00 0x 02.FF.FF.FF 0x FF .00.FF.00.FF.FF.FF
> 0x 00 0x 00.FF.FF.FF 0x 02.FF.FF.00 0x 03.FF.FF.FF
> 0x 00 0x 07.FF.FF.FF
> 0x 01 0x 07.FF.00.00

Figure 3 - Sample Color Bitmap 

The first line (0x 00) contains 1 white pixel (0x 00.FF.FF.FF), 3 yellow pixels 

(0x 02.FF.FF.00), and 4 white pixels ( 0x 03.FF.FF.FF). 

The second line (0x 00) contains a sequence of yellow + blue + yellow pixels 

(0xFE.FF.FF.00.00.00.FF.FF.FF.00), 3 white pixels ( 0x 02.FF.FF.FF), and a sequence of 

green + white pixel s (0x FF .00.FF.00.FF.FF.FF). 

The third line (0x 00) contains 2 yellow pixels (0x 01.FF.FF.00), 3 white pixels 

(0x 02.FF.FF.FF), and 3 green pixels ( 0x 02.00.FF .00) .

The fourth line (0x 00) contains 3 yellow pixels (0x 02.FF.FF.00), 3 white pixels 

(0x 02.FF.FF.FF), and a sequence of green + white pixel s (0x FF .00.FF.00.FF.FF.FF). 

The fifth line (0x 00) contains 1 white pixel (0x 00.FF.FF.FF), 3 yellow pixels 

(0x 02.FF.FF.00), and 4 white pixels ( 0x 03.FF.FF.FF). 

The sixth line ( 0x 00) contains 8 white pixels ( 0x 07.FF.FF.FF). 

The seventh and eighth lines ( 0x 01) contain 8 red pixels ( 0x 07.FF.00.00). PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 26 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

4.4.3 Sample DeviceCMYK Bitmap 

The 8x8 24 -bit DeviceCMYK image shown in Figure 3 would be encoded as the following 

108 octets:                 

> 0x 00 0x 00. 00.00.00.00 0x 02. 00.00. FF.00 0x 03. 00.00.00.00
> 0x 00 0x FE. 00.00.FF.00.FF.FF.00.00.00.00.FF.00 0x 02. 00.0 0.00.00
> 0xFF .FF.00.FF.00.00.00.00.00
> 0x 00 0x 01. 00.00. FF.00 0x 02. 00.00.00.00 0x 02.FF.00 .FF.00
> 0x 00 0x 02. 00.00 .FF.00 0x 02. 00.00.00.00 0xFF .FF.00.FF.00.00.00.00.00
> 0x 00 0x 00. 00.00.00.00 0x 02. 00.00. FF.00 0x 03. 00.00.00.00
> 0x 00 0x 07. 00.00.00.00
> 0x 01 0x 07. 00.FF.FF.00

The first line (0x 00) contains 1 white pixel (0x 00. 00.00.00.00 ), 3 yellow pixels 

(0x 02.00.00.FF. 00), and 4 white pixels ( 0x 03. 00.00.00 ). 

The second line (0x 00) contains a sequence of yellow + blue + yellow pixels 

(0x FE. 00.00. FF.00. FF.FF.00.00.0 0.00 .FF.00), 3 white pixels ( 0x 02. 00.00.00.00 ), and a 

sequence of green + white pixel s (0xFF .FF. 00.FF.00. 00.00.00.00 ). 

The third line (0x 00) contains 2 yellow pixels (0x 01. 00.00 .FF.00), 3 white pixels 

(0x 02.00.00.00.00 ), and 3 green pixels ( 0x 02 .FF.00 .FF.0 0).

The fourth line (0x 00) contains 3 yellow pixels (0x 02. 00.00 .FF.00), 3 white pixels 

(0x 02. 00.00.00.00), and a sequence of green + white pixel s

(0xFF .FF. 00.FF.00. 00.00.00.00 ). 

The fifth line (0x 00) contains 1 white pixel (0x 00. 00.00.00.00 ), 3 yellow pixels 

(0x 02.00.00.FF .00), and 4 white pixels ( 0x 03. 00.00.00.00 ). 

The sixth line ( 0x 00) contains 8 white pixels ( 0x 07. 00.00.00.00 ). 

The seventh and eighth lines ( 0x 01) contain 8 red pixels ( 0x 07. 00.FF.FF.00 ). PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 27 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 5. Semantic Model Elements 

This specification de fines three new PWG Semantic Model elements in the 

<s ervice>ServiceDescription group .

## 5.1 New <service>ServiceDescription Elements    

> Figure 4-New <service>ServiceDescription Elements

PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 28 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved.    

> Table 11 -New Service Description Elements

Element DataType Description or Keyword 

PwgRaster Document -

ResolutionSupported 

complex see 5.1.2 

Resolution complex the s upported sequence of resolutions 

in CrossFeed and Feed direction for 

PWG Raster files 

CrossFeedDir int allowed values for resolutions, in dots 

per inch, in CrossFeed direction 

[RFC2911 para 4.1.15] 

FeedDir int allowed values for resolutions, in dots 

per inch, in Feed direction [RFC2911 

para 4.1.15] 

Units keyword allowed units for resolutions; MUST be 

"Dpi" 

PwgRasterDocument -

SheetBack 

keyword see 5. 1.1 ;

PwgRaster DocumentSheetBack WKV 

PwgRaster Document -

Type Supported 

list of 

keywords 

see 5.1.3 ;

PwgRaster Document TypeWKV 

5.1.1 PwgRaster Document Sheet Back 

This CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED element specifies the bitmap coordinate system for 

the backside of duplex sheets. Printers with duplex printing capabilities MUST support this 

element . The following keyword values are defined: 

'Normal' - the backside has the origin at the top -left corner of the bitmap, 

'ManualTumble' - the backside has the origin at the top -left corner of the b itmap for 

'TwoSidedLongEdge' and the bottom -right corner (rotated 180º) of the bitmap for 

'TwoSidedShortEdge', 

'Rotated' - the backside image has the origin at the bottom -right corner (rotated 

180º) of the bitmap for 'TwoSidedLongEdge' and the top -left cor ner of the bitmap 

for 'TwoSidedShortEdge', or 

'Flipped' - the backside image has the origin at the bottom -left corner (X flipped) of 

the bitmap for 'TwoSidedLongEdge' and the top -right corner (Y flipped) for 

'TwoSidedShortEdge' .

Figure 5 visually shows the effect of each value on the bitmap image. The top of each 

page represents the first line of raster data that is transferred, with pixels being transferred 

from left to right. Also see Table 9 for the values that must be used for the 

CrossFeedTransform and FeedTransform page header fields. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 29 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved.     

> Figure 5-PwgRasterDocumentSheetBack and Sides

5.1.2 Pwg Raster Document Resolution Supported 

This REQUIRED element lists the supported page bitmap resolutions in dots per inch. 

Printers MUST be capable of accept ing or producing "image/pwg -raster" streams for the 

highest repo rted resolution on the largest supported media. Printers MUST support at 

least one resolution less than or equal to 360 dots per inch and SHOULD support at least 

one resolution greater than or equal to 600 dots per inch. 

5.1.3 Pwg Raster Document Type Supported 

This REQUIRED element lists the supported page bitmap color configurations. Table 12 

lists the standard keywords and the corresponding page header field values. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 30 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

Table 12 - Pwg Raster Document Type Supported Keyword Values 

Keyword BitsPerColor BitsPerPixel ColorSpace NumColors 

Black _1 1 1 3 1

Sgray _1 1 1 18 1

Adobe Rgb _8 8 24 20 3

Black _8 8 8 3 1

Cmyk _8 8 32 6 4

Device1 _8 8 8 48 1

Device2 _8 8 16 49 2

Device3 _8 8 24 50 3

Device4 _8 8 32 51 4

Device5 _8 8 40 52 5

Device6 _8 8 48 53 6

Device7 _8 8 56 54 7

Device8 _8 8 64 55 8

Device 9_ 8 8 72 56 9

Device 10_ 8 8 80 57 10 

Device 11_ 8 8 88 58 11 

Device 12_ 8 8 96 59 12 

Device 13_ 8 8 104 60 13 

Device 14_ 8 8 112 61 14 

Device 15_ 8 8 120 62 15 

Rgb_8 8 24 1 3

Sgray _8 8 8 18 1

Srgb _8 8 24 19 3

Adobe Rgb _16 16 48 20 3

Black _16 16 16 3 1

Cmyk _16 16 64 6 4

Device 1_16 16 16 48 1

Device2 _16 16 32 49 2

Device 3_16 16 48 50 3

Device4 _16 16 64 51 4

Device5 _16 16 80 52 5

Device6 _16 16 96 53 6

Device7_ 16 16 112 54 7

Device8_ 16 16 128 55 8

Device 9_ 16 16 144 56 9

Device 10_ 16 16 160 57 10 

Device 11_ 16 16 176 58 11 

Device 12_ 16 16 192 59 12 

Device 13_ 16 16 208 60 13 

Device 14_ 16 16 224 61 14 

Device 15_ 16 16 240 62 15 

Rgb_16 16 48 1 3

Sgray _16 16 16 18 1

Srgb _16 16 48 19 3PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 31 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 6. Conformance Requirements 

## 6.1 PWG Raster Consumer Requirements 

To claim conformance to this specification, a PWG Raster consumer MUST: 

(a) support the "image/pwg -raster" MIME media type as defined in section 4 of this 

specification and 

(b) conform to the Security Considerations defined in section 8 of this specification. 

## 6.2 PWG Raster Producer Requirements 

To claim conformance to this specification, a PWG Raster producer MUST: 

(a) generate document data conformi ng to the "image/pwg -raster" MIME media 

type as defined in section 4 of this specification and 

(b) conform to the Security Considerations defined in section 8 of this specification. 

## 6.3 Generic Printer Conformance Requirements 

To claim conformance to this specification, a Printer implementation MUST: 

(a) support all PWG Semantic M odel elements as defined in section 5 of this 

specification, 

(b) support the PWG Raster Consumer requirements as defined in section 6.1 of 

this specification, 

(c) support PWG Raster streams at the highest reported resolution reported by the 

“PwgRasterDocumentResolutionSupported” element and largest media size 

reported by the “MediaSupported” element, and 

(d) support PWG Raster streams with all resolutions reported by the 

“PwgRasterDocumentResolutionSupported” element as defined in section 5.1.2 of 

this specification .

If a Printer supports scanning and the creation of documents with the PWG Raster Format 

MIME media type , it MUST also :

(a) support the PWG Raster Producer requirements as defined in section 6.2 of this 

specification. 

A Printer implementation SHOULD: 

(a) support the "FeedDirection" element defined in the PWG Semantic Model. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 32 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

## 6.4 Generic Client Conformance Requirements 

To claim conformance to this specification, a Client MUST: 

(a) support the PWG Raster Producer requirements as defined in section 6.2 of this 

specification, 

(b) explicitly identify th e supported values of all Semantic Model elements defined 

in section 5 of this specification, 

(c) produce PWG Raster streams at an orientation, resolution, and size as reported 

by the "FeedDirection", “PwgRasterDocumentResolutionSupported”, and 

“MediaSupported” elements and as defined in section 5.1.2 of this specification, 

an d

(d) produce PWG Raster streams using Color Space and bit depth values as 

defined in section 5.1.3 of this specification. 

If a Client supports scanning, it MUST also :

(a) support the PWG Raster Consumer requirements as defined in section 6.1 of 

this specification. 

## 6.5 IPP Printer Conformance Requirements 

To claim conformance to this specification, an IPP Printer implementation MUST: 

(a) support the PWG Raster Consumer requirements as defined in section 6.1 of 

this specification ,

(b) supp ort all IPP attributes defined in section 10 of this specification ,

(c) support PWG Raster streams at the highest reported resolution reported by the 

“pwg -raster -do cument -resolution -supported” attribute and largest media size 

reported by the “media -supported” attribute, and 

(d) support PWG Raster streams with all resolutions reported by the “pwg -raster -

document -resolution -supported” attribute as defined in section 5.1.2 of this 

specification .

An IPP Printer SHOULD: 

(a) support the IPP “compression” attribute with the values “compress”, “deflate”, 

and/or “gzip” to further reduc e the size of PWG Raster documents , and 

(b) support the "feed -orientation" Job Template attribute defined in section 7.1 of 

PWG 5100.11 [PWG5100.11] .PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 33 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

## 6.6 IPP Client Conformance Requirements 

To claim conformance to this specification, an IPP Client MUST: 

(a) support the PWG Raster Producer requirements as defined in section 6.2 of this 

specification ,

(b) explicitly identify the supported values of all IPP attributes defined in section 10 

of this specification ,

(c) produce PWG Raster streams at a n orientation, re solution , and size as reported 

by the "feed -orientation", “pwg -raster -document -resolution -supported” , and “media -

supported” attributes and as defined in section 5.1.2 of this specification, and 

(d) produce PWG Raster streams using Color Space and bit depth values as 

defined in section 5.1.3 of this specification .

An IPP Clien t SHOULD: 

(a) support the IPP “compression” attribute with the values “compress”, “deflate”, 

and/or “gzip” to further reduce the size of PWG Raster documents. 

# 7. Internationalization Considerations 

Because PWG Raster streams contain no localizable text, there are no internationalization 

considerations for the PWG Raster format .

# 8. Security Considerations 

The security considerations for IPP are described in Section 8 of RFC 2911 [RFC2911]. 

Consumers of PWG Raster streams MUST range check all page header and bitmap 

values to protect against integer and buffer overflows. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 34 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 9. IANA Considerations 

## 9.1 MIME Media Type Registration 

Name : Michael Sweet 

E-mail : msweet@apple.com 

MIME media type name : Image 

MIME subtype name : Standards Tree – pwg -raster 

Required parameters : NO NE 

Optional parameters : NONE 

Encoding considerations : 

8-bit (raw) binary data. 

Security considerations : 

Raster data can be very large, which could fill a filesystem and cause a denial of 

service or system failure. Raster data contains no executables or macros. 

Authentication and access control are normally handled by the Internet Printing 

Protocol and Hyper -Text Transport Protocol. 

Interoperability considerations : 

NONE 

Published specification : 

ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs -ippraster10 -20120420 -5102.4 .pdf 

Applications which use this media : 

CUPS 

IPP Everywhere 

IPP Scan 

Additional information : 

1. Magic number(s) : 0x52.61.53.32 

2. File extension(s) : 

3. Macintosh file type code : PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 35 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

Person to contact for further information : 

1. Name : Michael Sweet 

2. E -mail : m sweet@apple .com 

Intended usage : Common 

Used for printing "raw" image data in formats acceptable to printer s. 

Author/Change controller : 

The Printer Working Group 

c/o The IEE E Industry Standards and Technology Organization 

445 Hoes Lane 

Piscataway, NJ 08854 

USA 

## 9.2 Attribute Registrations 

The attributes defined in this document will be published by IANA according to the 

procedures in RFC 2911 [RFC2911] section 6.2 in the following file: 

http://www.iana.org/assignments/ipp -registrations 

The registry entr ies will contain the following information:             

> Printer Description attributes: Reference
> --------------------------------
> pwg -raster -document -sheet -back (type2 keyword) [PWG5102. 4]
> pwg -raster -document -resolution -supported (1setOf resolution)
> [PWG5102. 4]
> pwg -raster -document -type -supported (1setOf type2 keyword)
> [PWG5102. 4]

## 9.3 Attribute Value Registrations 

The keyword attribute values defined in this document will be published by IANA 

according to the procedures in RFC 2911 [RFC2911] section 6.1 in the following file: 

http://www.iana.org/assignments/ipp -registrations 

The registry entries will contain the following information:           

> Attributes (attribute syntax)
> Keyword Attribute Value Refe rence
> --------------------------------
> pwg -raster -document -sheet -back (type2 keyword) [PWG 5102.4 ]
> normal [PWG 5102.4 ]

PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 36 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

manual -tumble [PWG 5102.4 ]

rotated [PWG 5102.4 ]

flipped [PWG 5102.4 ]

pwg -raster -document -type -supported (1setOf type2 keyword) 

[PWG 5102.4 ]

adobe -rgb _16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

adobe -rgb _8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

black _1 [PWG 5102.4 ]

black _16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

black _8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

cmyk _16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

cmyk _8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device1 _16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 1_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device10_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device10_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device11_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device11_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device12_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device12_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device13_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device13_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device14_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device14_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device15_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device15_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 2_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 2_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 3_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 3_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 4_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 4_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 5_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 5_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 6_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 6_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 7_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 7_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 8_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 8_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 9_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

device 9_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

rgb_8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

rgb_16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

sgray _1 [PWG 5102.4 ]

sgray _16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

sgray _8 [PWG 5102.4 ]

srgb _16 [PWG 5102.4 ]

srgb _8 [PWG 5102.4 ]PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 37 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 10. IPP Printer Description Attributes 

This specification defines three new IPP Printer description attributes. Table 13 lists the 

attributes. Semantic model keyword values follow the usual conversion from 

'ExampleKeyword' ( Title Case form) to 'example -keyword' (hyphenated words form).    

> Table 13 -IPP Printer Description Attributes

Element Name IPP Attribute Name 

PwgRasterDocumentResolutionSupported pwg -raster -document -resolution -supported 

PwgRasterDocumentSheetBack pwg -raster -document -sheet -back 

PwgRasterDocumentTypeSupported pwg -raster -document -type -supported 

## 10.1 pwg -raster -document -resolution -supported (1setOf resolution) 

This REQUIRED Printer attribute lists the supported page bitmap resolutions in dots per 

inch. 

## 10.2 pwg -raster -document -sheet -back (type2 keyword) 

This CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED Printer attribute specifies the bitmap coordinate 

system for the backside of duplex sheets. Printers with duplex printing capabilities MUST 

support this attribute. 

## 10.3 pwg -raster -document -type -supported (1setOf type2 keyword) 

This REQUIRED Printer at tribute lists the supported Color Space and bit depth 

combinations. PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 38 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 11. References 

## 11.1 Normative References 

[CUPSRASTER ] M. Sweet, “CUPS Raster Format”, http://www.cups.org/spec -

raster.html 

[ECMA388] "Open XML Paper Specification", ECMA -388, June 2009, 

http://www.ecma -international.org/publications/standards/Ecma -

388.htm 

[ISO32000] "Document management — Portable document format — Part 1: PDF 

1.7" , ISO 32000 -2008 

[POSTSCRIPT] Adobe Systems Incorporated, "PostScript® LANGUAGE 

REFERENCE, third edition", 19 99 

[PWG5100.7] T. Hastings, P. Zehler, "Standard for The Internet Printing Protocol 

(IPP): Job Extensions", PWG 5100.7, October 2003, 

ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs -ippjobext10 -20031031 -

5100.7.pdf 

[PWG5100.11] T. Hastings, D. Fullman, "IPP: Job an d Printer Extensions - Set 2 

(JPS2)", PWG 5100.11, October 2010, 

ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs -ippjobprinterext10 -20101030 -

5100.11.pdf 

[PWG5100.12] R. Bergman, H. Lewis, I. McDonald, M. Sweet, "Internet Printing 

Protocol Version 2.0 Second Editio n (IPP/2.0 SE)", PWG 5100.12, 

February 2011, ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs -ipp20 -

20110214 -5100.12.pdf 

[PWG5101.1] R. Bergman, T. Hastings, "Standard for Media Standardized Names", 

PWG 5101.1, February 2002, 

ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs -pwgmsn10 -20020226 -

5101.1.pdf 

[PWG5102.3] R. Seeler, "Portable Document Format: Image -Streamable (PDF/is)", 

March 2004, PWG 5102.3 -2004, 

ftp://pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs -ifxpdfis10 -20040315 -5102.3.pdf 

[PWG5108.1] W. Wagner, P. Zehler, "MFD Model and Com mon Semantics", PWG 

5108.1, April 2011, ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs -sm20 -

mfdmodel10 -20110415 -5108.1.pdf PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 39 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

[RFC2119] S. Bradner, "K ey words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 

Levels ", RFC 2119 /BCP 14 , March 1997, 

http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2 119.txt 

[RFC2911] T. Hastings, R. Herriot, R. deBry, S. Isaacson, P. Powell, "Internet 

Printing Protocol/1.1: Model and Semantics", RFC 2911, September 

2000, http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2911.txt 

[RFC3805] R. Bergman, H. Lewis, I. McDonald, "Printer MIB v2", RFC 3805, 

June 2004, http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3805.txt 

[STD68 ] D. Crocker, P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: 

ABNF", RFC 5234 /STD 68 , January 2008 ,

http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5234.txt 

## 11.2 Informative References 

[ANALYSIS] M. Sweet, "An An alysis of Raster Formats for Printing", September 

22, 2011, ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/ipp/whitepaper/RasterAnalysis -

20110922.pdf 

[SAMPLES] "Sample PWG Raster files ", ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/ipp/raster/ PWG 5102.4 -2012 – PWG Raster Format April 20, 2012 

Page 40 of 40 Copyright © 2011 -2012 The Printer Working Group, All rights reserved. 

# 12. Author's Address 

Michael Sweet 

Apple Inc. 

10431 N. De Anza Blvd. 

MS 38 -4LPT 

Cupertino CA 95014 

Send comments to the PWG IPP Mailing List: 

ipp@pwg.org (subscribers only) 

To subscribe, see the PWG web page: 

http://www.pwg.org/ 

Implementers of this specification document are encourages to join the IPP Mailin g List in 

order to participate in any discussions of clarification issues and review of registration 

proposals for additional attributes and values. 

The editor would like to especially thank the following individuals who also contributed 

significantly to t he development of this document: 

Justin Hutchings - Microsoft 

Ira McDonald - High North 

Andrew Mitchell - Hewlett Packard 

Glen Petrie - Epson 

William Wagner - TIC 

Peter Zehler - Xerox